Can we detect and provide evidence of US election districts with boundaries
that give an unfair advantage to one political party? The boundaries of
election districts must be redrawn periodically to reflect population changes.
Under current law, this task falls upon state legislators. Legislators
sometimes draw new boundaries that create an unfair advantage for their party,
a process called gerrymandering. Gerrymandering misrepresents voters, so all US
citizens have a vested interest in detection and prevention of gerrymandering.
There is no legal standard for what constitutes gerrymandering (versus natural
variation caused by new boundaries), so it is an ongoing problem and strong
evidence is needed to prove a case. As an example, courts in Pennsylvania and
North Carolina recently ruled that election boundaries in their states must be
redrawn due to gerrymandering.

In this project, we will explore statistical strategies to identify and provide
evidence of gerrymandering. The primary data are congressional district
boundaries, which are publicly available on the US Census Bureau’s website. In
addition to these, we will use vote count data, which are available for
elections up to 2016 from the US House of Representatives’ website and the
Harvard Election Data Archive. We will also use population and demographic data
available on the US Census Bureau’s website. With these data in hand, we will
design and implement an strategy to identify gerrymandering. An important
design consideration is that the strategy must be interpretable or provide
concrete evidence. We will compare the strengths and weaknesses of our design
with strategies previously developed by others. We will consider the project
successful if we are able to provide concrete insight into how gerrymandering
can be detected and/or previous strategies can be improved.

-------------

Comments from Duncan:

+ How will we use the data? What does it allow us to learn about minorities?

+ How minorities voted? How do we deal with aggregated data? Simpson's paradox?

+ How do we match the census data to the voting data and congressional
  districts?

+ What sort of technologies will we use in this project?

+ Do we know of actually gerrymandered districts? Can we lean practices of
  gerrymandering?

+ Is this a statistical inference problem?
